Reformatted Reactors homepage, in progress (#189)
Cantera/cantera-website: pages/science/reactors/cvodes.rst

.. title: CVODES and Time Integration in Cantera
.. has_math: true

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">CVODES and Time Integration in Cantera</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      This guide explains ways Cantera can solve the governing equations of 
      a transient Reactor Network problem. Additional insights 
      into Cantera's integrator (CVODES) are also provided.

Using Cantera to Advance a Reactor Network in Time
**************************************************

> Starting off the current state of the system, it can be advanced in time by 
> one of the following methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ``ReactorNetwork`` can be advanced in time by one of the following three methods:
```

> - ``step()``: The step method computes the state of the system at the a priori
>   unspecified time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`. The time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`
>   is internally computed so that all states of the system only change within a
>   (specifiable) band of absolute and relative tolerances. Additionally, the time
>   step must not be larger than a predefined maximum time step
>   :math:`\Delta t_{\mathrm{max}}`. The new time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}` is
>   returned by this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``step()``: The ``step()`` method computes the state of the system after one time step. The size of the step is determined by CVODES when the method is called. CVODES determines the step size by <fill in half a sentence of detail>. The time step must not be larger than a predefined maximum time step :math:`\Delta t_{\mathrm{max}}`. The new time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}` at the end of the single step is returned by this function.This method produces the highest time resolution in the output data of the methods implemented in Cantera.
```

> - ``advance(``\ :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`\ ``)``: This method computes the state of the
>   system at time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`. :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}` describes
>   the absolute time from the initial time of the system. By calling this method
>   in a for loop for pre-defined times, the state of the system is obtained for
>   exactly the times specified. Internally, several ``step()`` calls are
>   typically performed to reach the accurate state at time
>   :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``advance(t_new)``: This method computes the state of the system at the user-provided time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`. :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}` is the absolute time from the initial time of the system. Although the user specifies the time when integration should stop, CVODES chooses the time step size as the network is integrated. Many of these internal CVODES time steps are usually required to reach :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}`. As such, ``advance(t_new)`` preserves the accuracy of using ``step()`` but allows consistent time step spacing in the output data.
```

- ``advance_to_steady_state(max_steps, residual_threshold, atol,
  write_residuals)`` [Python interface only]: If the steady state solution of a
  reactor network is of interest, this method can be used. Internally, the
  steady state is approached by time stepping. The network is considered to be
  at steady state if the feature-scaled residual of the state vector is below a
  given threshold value (which by default is 10 times the time step ``rtol``).

> The use of the ``advance`` method in a loop has the advantage that it produces
> results corresponding to a predefined time series. These are associated with a
> predefined memory consumption and well comparable between simulation runs with
> different parameters. However, some detail (for example, a fast ignition process)
> might not be resolved in the output data due to the typically large time steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``advance(t_new)`` is typically used when consistent, regular, time steps are required in the output data. This usually simplifies comparisons among many simulation results at a single time point. However, some detail, for example, a fast ignition process, might not be resolved in the output data if the user-provided time step is not small enough.

```

To avoid losing this detail, the
`Reactor::setAdvanceLimit <{{% ct_docs doxygen/html/dc/d5e/classCantera_1_1Reactor.html#a9b630edc7d836e901886d7fd81134d9e %}}>`__
method (C++) or the :py:func:`Reactor.set_advance_limit` method (Python) can be
used to set the maximum amount that a specified solution component can change
between output times. For an example of this feature's use, see the example

> `reactor1.py </examples/python/reactors/reactor1.py.html>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`reactor1.py </examples/python/reactors/reactor1.py.html>`__. However, as a tradeoff, the time step sizes in the output data are no longer guaranteed to be uniform.
```

> The ``step`` method results in many more data points because of the small
> timesteps needed. Additionally, the absolute time has to be kept track of
> manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``step()`` method results in many more data points because of the small
timesteps needed. Additionally, the absolute time has to be kept track of
manually.
```

I'm not sure what the second sentence means. The absolute time is available from `ReactorNet.time`, and you have to keep track of the time when you're using `advance(t_new)` as well... I suppose you could have a list of times to fill in...

```python
times = np.arange(1, 10)
for t in times:
    netw.advance(t)
```
but you could just as easily compute the new time by `t + dt` and have to add it to a list anyways. So I'd suggest deleting this paragraph, I don't think it adds much considering the change I suggested above for the `step()` description.

Even though Cantera comes pre-defined with typical parameters for tolerances

> and the maximum internal time step, the solution sometimes diverges. To solve

Reviewer: What does `diverges` mean in this context?

this problem, three parameters can be tuned: The absolute time stepping
tolerances, the relative time stepping tolerances, and the maximum time step. A
reduction of the latter value is particularly useful when dealing with abrupt
changes in the boundary conditions (for example, opening/closing valves; see

> also the `IC engine example </examples/python/reactors/ic_engine.py.html>`__).

Reviewer: Not only is it particularly useful, it's practically required in this case. But on the other side, it's also pretty much the only case when you want to set this parameter. Otherwise you're introducing unnecessary stiffness into the solution by forcing more time steps that aren't needed.

How Does Cantera's Reactor Network Time Integration Feature Actually Work?
==========================================================================

There's a great description of the science behind Cantera's reactor network 
simulation capabilities available on the Cantera website, 
`here <https://cantera.org/science/reactors/reactors.html>`__. This section will go into more 
developer-oriented detail about how the last step, `ReactorNet`'s 
`time integration methods <https://cantera.org/science/reactors/reactors.html#time-

> integration-for-reactor-networks>`__, actually work. A `ReactorNet` object doesn't 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
integration-for-reactor-networks>`__, actually work. A ``ReactorNet`` object doesn't 
```

> perform time integration on its own. It generates a system of ODE's based on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
perform time integration on its own. It generates a system of ODEs based on the 
```

What does it mean to "generate" a system of ODEs in this context? Cantera never actually writes down any of the equations from the `reactors.html` page... It's probably more accurate to say something more like, Cantera generates a Jacobian array for the set of Reactors installed in the ReactorNet. This Jacobian, along with functions to evaluate the residual of each ODE representing the system, is passed to an Integrator. You'll need to tweak the phrasing there probably, but I think that's somewhat better 😄

and the state vector, `y`. For more information about ODE right-hand side function requirements, 
see `CVODES User Guide <https://sundials.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cvodes/Usage/SIM.html#user-supplied-functions>`__.

The `CVodesIntegrator` wrapper class provides a useful C++ interface for configuring this C function by pairing with 
`FuncEval`, an abstract base class for ODE right-hand-side function evaluators (`Documentation 
<https://cantera.org/documentation/docs-2.4/doxygen/html/d1/dd1/classCantera_1_1FuncEval.html>`__). Classes derived 
from `FuncEval` will implement the evaluation of the provided ODE system.

An ODE right-hand-side evaluator is always needed in the ODE solution process (it's the only way to describe the system!), and for that reason a `FuncEval` object is a required parameter 
when initializing any type of `Integrator`.

Let's take a look at how `ReactorNet` implements this `FuncEval` object. `ReactorNet` actually points to itself when 
defining a `FuncEval` type, meaning it defines *itself* as a `FuncEval` derivative.

Then, `ReactorNet` initializes the `Integrator`, using a reference to itself (as a `FuncEval`) from the 

> `this <https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/this-pointer-in-c/>`__ pointer.

Reviewer: Can we find a better reference than `geeksforgeeks`? I find their site nearly unusable with all the ads, popups to subscribe, etc.

.. title: CVODES and Time Integration in Cantera
.. has_math: true

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">CVODES and Time Integration in Cantera</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      This guide explains ways Cantera can solve the governing equations of 
      a transient Reactor Network problem. Additional insights 
      into the integrator utilized by Cantera (CVODES) are also provided.

Using Cantera to Advance a Reactor Network in Time
**************************************************

A ``ReactorNetwork`` can be advanced in time by one of the following three 
methods:

- ``step()``: The ``step()`` method computes the state of the system after one 
  time step. The size of the step is determined by CVODES when the method is called. 

>   CVODES determines the step size by <fill in half a sentence of detail>. The time 

Reviewer 2: This still needs some work...

  step must not be larger than a predefined maximum time step 
  :math:`\Delta t_{\mathrm{max}}`. The new time :math:`t_{\mathrm{new}}` at the end 

>   of the single step is returned by this function.This method produces the highest time 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  of the single step is returned by this function. This method produces the highest time 
```

between output times. For an example of this feature's use, see the example
`reactor1.py </examples/python/reactors/reactor1.py.html>`__. However, as a tradeoff, 
the time step sizes in the output data are no longer guaranteed to be uniform.

Even though Cantera comes pre-defined with typical parameters for tolerances
and the maximum internal time step, the solver may not be correctly configured
for the specific system. In this case the internal timestep solutions may not 
converge towards a single value. To solve this problem, three parameters can be 
tuned: The absolute time stepping tolerances, the relative time stepping tolerances, 
and the maximum time step. A reduction of the latter value is particularly useful 
when dealing with abrupt changes in the boundary conditions (for example, 
opening/closing valves; see also the `IC engine example </examples/python/reactors
/ic_engine.py.html>`__).

How Does Cantera's Reactor Network Time Integration Feature Actually Work?
==========================================================================

There's a great description of the science behind Cantera's reactor network 
simulation capabilities available on the Cantera website, 

> `here <https://cantera.org/science/reactors/reactors.html>`__. This section will go into more 

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we need to pat ourselves on the back about how *great* the other page is...

integration-for-reactor-networks>`__, actually work. A ``ReactorNet`` object doesn't 
perform time integration on its own. Cantera generates a Jacobian array for the set 
of ``Reactor`` objects contained in the ``ReactorNet``. This Jacobian, along with 
functions to evaluate the residual of each ODE representing the system, is passed to 
an ``Integrator``.

Following integration from Reactor Network creation to completion
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Step 1: Reactor(s) created in Reactor Network
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

First, let's take a look at a basic example to see how we might utilize Cantera's time integration 
functionality. We'll simulate an isolated reactor in Python that is homogeneously filled by a gas 
mixture (the gas state used in this example is arbitrary, but interesting because it's 
explosive). Then we'll advance the simulation in time to an (arbitrary) absolute time of 
1 second, noting the changes in the state of the gas.

.. code-block::

    >>> import cantera as ct                           #import Cantera's Python module

>     >>> gas = ct.Solution("gri30.yaml")                #create a default GRI-Mech 3.0 gas mixture

Reviewer 2: I'd ditch the `>>>` prefixes, since this isn't intermingling inputs and outputs, and make sure that this gets formatted nicely with the correct syntax highlighting in the HTML output.

    >>> gas.TPX = 1000.0, ct.one_atm, "H2:2,O2:1,N2:4" #set gas to an interesting state
    >>> reac = ct.IdealGasReactor(gas)                 #create a reactor containing the gas
    >>> sim = ct.ReactorNet([reac])                    #add the reactor to a new ReactorNet simulator
    >>> gas()                #view the initial state of the mixture (state summary will be printed to console)
    >>> sim.advance(1)       #advance the simulation to the specified absolute time, t = 1 sec
    >>> gas()                #view the updated state of the mixture, reflecting properties at t = 1 sec

For a more advanced example that adds inlets and outlets to the reactor, see Cantera's combustor example 
(`Python <https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/main/interfaces/cython/cantera/examples/reactors/combustor.py>`__ 

> | `C++ <https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/main/samples/cxx/combustor/combustor.cpp>`__). Additional examples 

Reviewer 2: Better to link to these directly on the Cantera website as `/examples/python/reactors/combustor.py.html` and `/examples/cxx/combustor.html`.

Step 3: Information about current gas state provided to an `Integrator`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``Integrator`` class is Cantera's interface for ODE system integrators.

``Integrator`` is a `polymorphic base class <http://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/polymorphism/>`__; it 
defines a set of *virtual* functionalities that derived classes (the actual ODE system integrators) will 
provide implementations for.

**Integrator.h** creates a ``newIntegrator()``. Factory Method ``newIntegrator()`` creates and returns a 
pointer to an ``Integrator`` instance of type ``itype``. The ``newIntegrator()`` instance will automatically 
have an ``itype`` of ``CVODES``, which is installed with Cantera. The ``newIntegrator()`` will be stored as 
variable ``m_integ``.

Step 4: Communicate with CVODES using a wrapper function
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because ``CVODES`` is written in C, the ``CVodesIntegrator`` C++ wrapper is used to access the solver.
The ``CVodesIntegrator`` class is a C++ wrapper class for ``CVODES``. (`Documentation 

> <https://cantera.org/documentation/docs-2.4/doxygen/html/d9/d6b/classCantera_1_1CVodesIntegrator.html>`__)

Reviewer 2: Let's definitely not link to the Cantera 2.4 documentation -- please use the version-independent way of doing this.

when initializing any type of ``Integrator``.

Let's take a look at how ``ReactorNet`` implements this ``FuncEval`` object. ``ReactorNet`` actually points to itself when 
defining a ``FuncEval`` type, meaning it defines *itself* as a ``FuncEval`` derivative.

Then, ``ReactorNet`` initializes the ``Integrator``, using a reference to itself (as a ``FuncEval``) from the 
`this <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/this>`__ pointer.

To be a valid ``FuncEval`` object, a ``ReactorNet`` needs to provide implementations for all of ``FuncEval``'s 
virtual functions, particularly the actual ODE right-hand-side computation 
function, ``FuncEval::eval()``. Note that this is declared as a `pure virtual 
<https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/abstract_class>`__ function, which makes 
``FuncEval`` an abstract class:

To evaluate the reactor governing equations the following parameters must be known:

@param[in] t time.
@param[out] LHS pointer to start of vector of left-hand side 
coefficients for governing equations, length m_nv, default values 1
@param[out] RHS pointer to start of vector of right-hand side 
coefficients for governing equations, length m_nv, default values 0

>     

Reviewer 2: This needs some formatting work -- it currently just all gets written out as if it was a paragraph.

.. code-block::

>     virtual void eval(double t, double* LHS, double* RHS);

Reviewer 2: a `code-block` needs a blank line before the start of the code -- currently this is generating an angry red error message in the HTML output.

``eval()`` is called by ``ReactorNet::eval``.

The above code shows the necessary inputs for solving the ODEs using the ``eval()`` function. ``eval()`` takes in the
value of each state variable derivative (``ydot``) at a time ``t``, and will write the integrated values for each
state varaible to the solution vector (``y``).

Step 7: ``eval()`` is called to solve provided ODEs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Along with the rest of ``FuncEval``'s virtual functions, an appropriate override is provided for ``FuncEval::eval()`` in 
``ReactorNet``

.. code-block::

> 

Reviewer 2: You should tell this that it's C++ code so the following code will be formatted nicely.

    void ReactorNet::eval(doublereal t, doublereal* y, doublereal* ydot, doublereal* p)
    {
        m_time = t; // This will be replaced at the end of the timestep
        updateState(y);
        for (size_t n = 0; n < m_reactors.size(); n++) {
            m_reactors[n]->evalEqs(t, y + m_start[n], ydot + m_start[n], p);
        }

>         checkFinite("ydot", ydot, m_nv);

Reviewer 2: Well, the `evalEqs` method no longer exists, so this is a bit out of date...
